Development.md, before:


# Technical details

### Implementation 

* Languages
  - Front end is [ClojureScript](https://clojurescript.org/) with ([re-frame](https://github.com/day8/re-frame))
* Dependencies
  - UI framework: [re-frame](https://github.com/day8/re-frame)
  - Client-side routing: [bidi](https://github.com/juxt/bidi) and [pushy](https://github.com/clj-commons/pushy)
  - UI components: [re-com](https://github.com/day8/re-com)
  - Screen breakpoints tool: [BREAKING-POINT](https://github.com/gadfly361/breaking-point)
* Build tools
  - CLJS compilation, dependency management, REPL, & hot reload: [`shadow-cljs`](https://github.com/thheller/shadow-cljs)
* Development tools
  - Debugging: [CLJS DevTools](https://github.com/binaryage/cljs-devtools)
  - Emacs integration: [CIDER](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider)


### Environment Setup

1. Install [JDK 8 or later](https://openjdk.java.net/install/) (Java Development Kit)
2. Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (JavaScript runtime environment) which should include
   [NPM](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/npm) or if your Node.js installation does not include NPM also install it.
5. Clone this repo and open a terminal in the `bandish-editor` project root directory

### Browser Setup

Browser caching should be disabled when developer tools are open to prevent interference with
[`shadow-cljs`](https://github.com/thheller/shadow-cljs) hot reloading.

Custom formatters must be enabled in the browser before
[CLJS DevTools](https://github.com/binaryage/cljs-devtools) can display ClojureScript data in the
console in a more readable way.

#### Chrome/Chromium

1. Open [DevTools](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/) (Linux/Windows: `F12`
or `Ctrl-Shift-I`; macOS: `⌘-Option-I`)
2. Open DevTools Settings (Linux/Windows: `?` or `F1`; macOS: `?` or `Fn+F1`)
3. Select `Preferences` in the navigation menu on the left, if it is not already selected
4. Under the `Network` heading, enable the `Disable cache (while DevTools is open)` option
5. Under the `Console` heading, enable the `Enable custom formatters` option

#### Firefox

1. Open [Developer Tools](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools) (Linux/Windows: `F12` or
`Ctrl-Shift-I`; macOS: `⌘-Option-I`)
2. Open [Developer Tools Settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Settings)
(Linux/macOS/Windows: `F1`)
3. Under the `Advanced settings` heading, enable the `Disable HTTP Cache (when toolbox is open)`
option

Unfortunately, Firefox does not yet support custom formatters in their devtools. For updates, follow
the enhancement request in their bug tracker:
[1262914 - Add support for Custom Formatters in devtools](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1262914).

## Development

### Running the App

Start a temporary local web server, build the app with the `dev` profile, and serve the app,
browser test runner and karma test runner with hot reload:

```sh
npm install
npx shadow-cljs watch app
```

Please be patient; it may take over 20 seconds to see any output, and over 40 seconds to complete.

When `[:app] Build completed` appears in the output, browse to
[http://localhost:8280/](http://localhost:8280/).

Opening the app in your browser starts a
[ClojureScript browser REPL](https://clojurescript.org/reference/repl#using-the-browser-as-an-evaluation-environment),
to which you may now connect.

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from Emacs with CIDER

Connect to the browser REPL:
```
M-x cider-jack-in-cljs
```

See
[Shadow CLJS User's Guide: Emacs/CIDER](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#cider)
for more information. Note that the mentioned [`.dir-locals.el`](.dir-locals.el) file has already
been created for you.

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from VS Code with Calva

See the [re-frame-template README](https://github.com/day8/re-frame-template) for [Calva](https://github.com/BetterThanTomorrow/calva) instuctions. See also https://calva.io for Calva documentation.


#### Connecting to the browser REPL from other editors

See
[Shadow CLJS User's Guide: Editor Integration](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#_editor_integration).
Note that `npm run watch` runs `npx shadow-cljs watch` for you, and that this project's running build ids is
`app`, `browser-test`, `karma-test`, or the keywords `:app`, `:browser-test`, `:karma-test` in a Clojure context.

Alternatively, search the web for info on connecting to a `shadow-cljs` ClojureScript browser REPL
from your editor and configuration.

For example, in Vim / Neovim with `fireplace.vim`
1. Open a `.cljs` file in the project to activate `fireplace.vim`
2. In normal mode, execute the `Piggieback` command with this project's running build id, `:app`:
    ```vim
    :Piggieback :app
    ```

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from a terminal

1. Connect to the `shadow-cljs` nREPL:
    ```sh
    lein repl :connect localhost:8777
    ```
    The REPL prompt, `shadow.user=>`, indicates that is a Clojure REPL, not ClojureScript.

2. In the REPL, switch the session to this project's running build id, `:app`:
    ```clj
    (shadow.cljs.devtools.api/nrepl-select :app)
    ```
    The REPL prompt changes to `cljs.user=>`, indicating that this is now a ClojureScript REPL.
3. See [`user.cljs`](dev/cljs/user.cljs) for symbols that are immediately accessible in the REPL
without needing to `require`.

### Running `shadow-cljs` Actions

See a list of [`shadow-cljs CLI`](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#_command_line)
actions:
```sh
npx shadow-cljs --help
```

Please be patient; it may take over 10 seconds to see any output. Also note that some actions shown
may not actually be supported, outputting "Unknown action." when run.

Run a shadow-cljs action on this project's build id (without the colon, just `app`):
```sh
npx shadow-cljs <action> app
```
### Debug Logging

The `debug?` variable in [`config.cljs`](src/cljs/bhatkhande_svg_viewer/config.cljs) defaults to `true` in
[`dev`](#running-the-app) builds, and `false` in [`prod`](#production) builds.

Use `debug?` for logging or other tasks that should run only on `dev` builds:

```clj
(ns bhatkhande-svg-viewer.example
  (:require [bhatkhande-svg-viewer.config :as config])

(when config/debug?
  (println "This message will appear in the browser console only on dev builds."))
```

## Production

Build the app with the `prod` profile:

```sh
npm install
npm run release
```

Please be patient; it may take over 15 seconds to see any output, and over 30 seconds to complete.

The `resources/public/js/compiled` directory is created, containing the compiled `app.js` and
`manifest.edn` files.

## Cors config for storage

Allow cors request from hosts. See https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil/commands/cors#synopsis

`gsutil cors set  cors-config gs://cloudbucket.appspot.com`

Commit message:

Clicking on my notations doesnt open bandish (#189)
* debug for link not opening

* add debugs

* don't load composition from cache

* update the spec to the latest format used

* add lyrics to spec

* fix import/export with multi-part format

* routes should support reload on /app

* document  chrome launcher to allow set-user event when testing on localhost

* add debugs for click not opening

Development.md, after:


# Technical details

### Implementation 

* Languages
  - Front end is [ClojureScript](https://clojurescript.org/) with ([re-frame](https://github.com/day8/re-frame))
* Dependencies
  - UI framework: [re-frame](https://github.com/day8/re-frame)
  - Client-side routing: [bidi](https://github.com/juxt/bidi) and [pushy](https://github.com/clj-commons/pushy)
  - UI components: [re-com](https://github.com/day8/re-com)
  - Screen breakpoints tool: [BREAKING-POINT](https://github.com/gadfly361/breaking-point)
* Build tools
  - CLJS compilation, dependency management, REPL, & hot reload: [`shadow-cljs`](https://github.com/thheller/shadow-cljs)
* Development tools
  - Debugging: [CLJS DevTools](https://github.com/binaryage/cljs-devtools)
  - Emacs integration: [CIDER](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider)


### Environment Setup

1. Install [JDK 8 or later](https://openjdk.java.net/install/) (Java Development Kit)
2. Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (JavaScript runtime environment) which should include
   [NPM](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/npm) or if your Node.js installation does not include NPM also install it.
5. Clone this repo and open a terminal in the `bandish-editor` project root directory

### Browser Setup

Browser caching should be disabled when developer tools are open to prevent interference with
[`shadow-cljs`](https://github.com/thheller/shadow-cljs) hot reloading.

Custom formatters must be enabled in the browser before
[CLJS DevTools](https://github.com/binaryage/cljs-devtools) can display ClojureScript data in the
console in a more readable way.

For local testing, Firebase won't send the set-user event. [See here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/79114969) for a workaround. You need to start Chrome with `google-chrome --args --disable-features=ThirdPartyStoragePartitioning`

#### Chrome/Chromium

1. Open [DevTools](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/) (Linux/Windows: `F12`
or `Ctrl-Shift-I`; macOS: `⌘-Option-I`)
2. Open DevTools Settings (Linux/Windows: `?` or `F1`; macOS: `?` or `Fn+F1`)
3. Select `Preferences` in the navigation menu on the left, if it is not already selected
4. Under the `Network` heading, enable the `Disable cache (while DevTools is open)` option
5. Under the `Console` heading, enable the `Enable custom formatters` option

#### Firefox

1. Open [Developer Tools](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools) (Linux/Windows: `F12` or
`Ctrl-Shift-I`; macOS: `⌘-Option-I`)
2. Open [Developer Tools Settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Settings)
(Linux/macOS/Windows: `F1`)
3. Under the `Advanced settings` heading, enable the `Disable HTTP Cache (when toolbox is open)`
option

Unfortunately, Firefox does not yet support custom formatters in their devtools. For updates, follow
the enhancement request in their bug tracker:
[1262914 - Add support for Custom Formatters in devtools](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1262914).

## Development

### Running the App

Start a temporary local web server, build the app with the `dev` profile, and serve the app,
browser test runner and karma test runner with hot reload:

```sh
npm install
npx shadow-cljs watch app
```

Please be patient; it may take over 20 seconds to see any output, and over 40 seconds to complete.

When `[:app] Build completed` appears in the output, browse to
[http://localhost:8280/](http://localhost:8280/).

Opening the app in your browser starts a
[ClojureScript browser REPL](https://clojurescript.org/reference/repl#using-the-browser-as-an-evaluation-environment),
to which you may now connect.

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from Emacs with CIDER

Connect to the browser REPL:
```
M-x cider-jack-in-cljs
```

See
[Shadow CLJS User's Guide: Emacs/CIDER](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#cider)
for more information. Note that the mentioned [`.dir-locals.el`](.dir-locals.el) file has already
been created for you.

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from VS Code with Calva

See the [re-frame-template README](https://github.com/day8/re-frame-template) for [Calva](https://github.com/BetterThanTomorrow/calva) instuctions. See also https://calva.io for Calva documentation.


#### Connecting to the browser REPL from other editors

See
[Shadow CLJS User's Guide: Editor Integration](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#_editor_integration).
Note that `npm run watch` runs `npx shadow-cljs watch` for you, and that this project's running build ids is
`app`, `browser-test`, `karma-test`, or the keywords `:app`, `:browser-test`, `:karma-test` in a Clojure context.

Alternatively, search the web for info on connecting to a `shadow-cljs` ClojureScript browser REPL
from your editor and configuration.

For example, in Vim / Neovim with `fireplace.vim`
1. Open a `.cljs` file in the project to activate `fireplace.vim`
2. In normal mode, execute the `Piggieback` command with this project's running build id, `:app`:
    ```vim
    :Piggieback :app
    ```

#### Connecting to the browser REPL from a terminal

1. Connect to the `shadow-cljs` nREPL:
    ```sh
    lein repl :connect localhost:8777
    ```
    The REPL prompt, `shadow.user=>`, indicates that is a Clojure REPL, not ClojureScript.

2. In the REPL, switch the session to this project's running build id, `:app`:
    ```clj
    (shadow.cljs.devtools.api/nrepl-select :app)
    ```
    The REPL prompt changes to `cljs.user=>`, indicating that this is now a ClojureScript REPL.
3. See [`user.cljs`](dev/cljs/user.cljs) for symbols that are immediately accessible in the REPL
without needing to `require`.

### Running `shadow-cljs` Actions

See a list of [`shadow-cljs CLI`](https://shadow-cljs.github.io/docs/UsersGuide.html#_command_line)
actions:
```sh
npx shadow-cljs --help
```

Please be patient; it may take over 10 seconds to see any output. Also note that some actions shown
may not actually be supported, outputting "Unknown action." when run.

Run a shadow-cljs action on this project's build id (without the colon, just `app`):
```sh
npx shadow-cljs <action> app
```
### Debug Logging

The `debug?` variable in [`config.cljs`](src/cljs/bhatkhande_svg_viewer/config.cljs) defaults to `true` in
[`dev`](#running-the-app) builds, and `false` in [`prod`](#production) builds.

Use `debug?` for logging or other tasks that should run only on `dev` builds:

```clj
(ns bhatkhande-svg-viewer.example
  (:require [bhatkhande-svg-viewer.config :as config])

(when config/debug?
  (println "This message will appear in the browser console only on dev builds."))
```

## Production

Build the app with the `prod` profile:

```sh
npm install
npm run release
```

Please be patient; it may take over 15 seconds to see any output, and over 30 seconds to complete.

The `resources/public/js/compiled` directory is created, containing the compiled `app.js` and
`manifest.edn` files.

## Cors config for storage

Allow cors request from hosts. See https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil/commands/cors#synopsis

`gsutil cors set  cors-config gs://cloudbucket.appspot.com`
